\input texinfo
@settitle GCOM: Generic Component Object Model
@setfilename gcom.info
@setshortcontentsaftertitlepage

@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004 Samuel A. Falvo II

@quotation
This software is provided 'as-is', without any implied or express warranty.
In no event shall the authors be held liable for damages arising from the
use this software.

Permission is granted for anyone to use this software for any purpose,
including commercial applications, and to alter it and redistribute it
freely, subject to the following restrictions:

1. The origin of this software must not be misrepresented; you must not
   claim that you wrote the original software. If you use this software in a
   product, an acknowledgment in the product documentation would be
   appreciated but is not required.

2. Altered source versions must be plainly marked as such, and must not be
   misrepresented as being the original software.

3. This notice may not be removed or altered from any source
   distribution.
@end quotation
@end copying

@titlepage
@title Generic Component Object Model
@subtitle Programmers Reference Guide
@author Samuel A. Falvo II <kc5tja@arrl.net>
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@shortcontents
@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Generic Component Object Model

The Generic Component Object Model, or GCOM, is an open source
implementation of Microsoft's COM middle-ware technology.  GCOM was
written primarily as a learning tool, to figure out how it worked under
the hood.  Since then, it has evolved to a stable, in-process-only COM
implementation, absolutely ideal for application extensibility uses.
Future development of GCOM will take it into the realm of distributed
objects, supporting an object RPC mechanism that will likely be built on
top of the BEEP protocol.

@menu
* Copyright Notice:: GCOM's Copyright Notice, which also covers this
documentation.

* Why COM?:: Why COM?

* Tutorial 1:: Making in-process clients and servers.

* Index::  Concept Index.
@end menu
@end ifnottex

@node Copyright Notice
@unnumbered Copyright
@insertcopying

@include com.why.texinfo

@include tutorial-1.texinfo

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye

